---
title: "Investigating the transposon landscape and silencing within Duckweeds"
excerpt: "In plants transposon silencing occurs primarily through RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM). However, duckweeds lack the machinery required for RdDM yet still manage to silence transposons through DNA methylation. This led to a hyothesis or a non-canonical-RdDM pathway for transposon silencing. "
collection: portfolio
---
DNA methylation is a key process within genomic defences to suppress the proliferation of transposons. In plants this occurs through the RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway. RdDM uses 24 bp small RNAs to methylate CG, CHG, and CHH sites within the genome ([Xie and Yu, 2015;](https://doi.org/10.2174%2F1389202915666141128002211) [Erdmann and Picard, 2020](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1009034)). However, plants within the Lemnoideae subfamily (duckweeds) lack typically conserved RdDM components and do not produce the 24 bp RNA. Despite this, duckweeds are capable of suppressing transposons through methylation suggesting the possibility of an alternative, non-canonical RdDM pathway.

I was fortunate to be accepted onto the Vienna BioCenter Summer School, and joined the [Marí-Ordóñez](https://www.oeaw.ac.at/gmi/research/research-groups/arturo-mari-ordonez) group at the Gregor Mendel Institute. Here, I focused on understanding induced methylation patterns of a transgene acting as a model for non-self DNA in *Lemna minor*. This project was my first wet-lab research project outside of university teaching laboratories, and included transformations and bisulfite PCRs. Alongside this was I completed an *in-silico* phylogenetics analysis of retrotransposons within three duckweed species.

At the end of the summer school I presented my findings at the Vienna BioCenter Summer School Symposium. This included an audience of fellow summer school fellows, as well as researchers of the institutes.